---
Author: Todd Sandler and Keith Hartley
Book: The Economics of Defense
Chapter: "5"
Pages: 113-119 (Incomplete)
---

The procurement of defense equipment is big business. Expenditure procurement in 1992 accounted for between 17 and 22 percent of total military expenditure for European NATO and USA, respectively (SIPRI, 1993). These share figures nations major weapons procurement only, so under-stating real arms procurement expenditure. In the UK, for example, in the early 1990s expenditure on equipment accounted for about 40 percent of defense spending.

Critics of defense equipment procurement policies point to the high costs of weapons, cost escalation, delays in delivery, deficiencies in performance, poor reliability, and cancellations of costly projects. Contractors are further criticized with allegations of excessive profits,waste, fraud, and inefficiency (Austin and Larkey, 1992; McNaugher,1990). Such criticisms immediately raise a methodological problem:What are the criteria for assessing procurement policy and defense contracting? Is it assumed that the ideal contract type is one of a perfect project which encounters no technical, cost or time problems? Or are comparisons being made with actual previous project experience within a country or in other countries?
 
This chapter reviews the literature on the various types of defense contracts and competitive procurement. Decisions to buy defense equipment are reflected in the award of a contract whereby a supplier provides a product or service of a specified quality over some time period in return for an agreed payment. This description simplifies the problems reflected in the transaction costs of acquiring information about products and suppliers, organizing competitions, bargaining with contractors, and then writing, monitoring, and enforcing contracts. Contracting requires the government as a buyer or principal to specify its requirements to the a contractor or agent, and to ensure that the agent pursues the goals of principal. Contracts which cannot specify all the details of a buyer's requirements provide the contractor with opportunities for discretionary writing, behavior (e.g., pursuing managerial preferences). Similarly, monitoring, and enforcing contracts requires outputs to be specified  in measurable form. However, the incentives and penalties incorporated  into the contract will affect the behavior of agents: individuals and groups can play any games and the results might be unexpected and undesirable. The chapter starts by reviewing the traditional approach to defense contracting; and  it then considers the literature on cost-estimating relationships and various types of contracts including the more recent theoretical developments. Throughout the survey, there will be a recent focus on the features of the market within which contracting takes place, the behavior of agents, including contractors, and their response to different contractual incentives and regulatory constraints. Competitive procurement policies are then evaluated. The opportunities for competition are assessed and consideration is given to its benefits and costs.

## Market Failure

At one level, defense equipment markets are like any other market: they bring together buyers and sellers (Hooper and Buck, 1991). National defense ministries and their-armed forces as well as overseas governments demand defense equipment. On the supply side, defense industries both nationally and overseas, provide equipment. And the demand and supply sides are brought together through a legally binding contract whereby the buyer agrees to pay a certain price for specified product delivered on time. In some instances, the government a as the buyer might impose regulatory requirements on the contractor (e.g. profit controls). Figure 5.1 illustrates the market situation with an example from the UK.

Defense equipment markets, however, have some distinguishing features concerning the role of governments, cost trends, technical progress, cost curves, and regulation (Peck and Scherer, 1962):

1. Governments are central to understanding defense equipment markets. Where it is a monopsonist, a government determines technical progress through its choice of equipment and it sole choose whether to import or buy from its domestic industry. As can the tanks, warships), it can determine the size of its domestic defense or major buyer (e.g. combat aircraft, missiles, submarines, efficiency, and ownership. In this context, the view has been industry, its structure, entry and exit, prices, exports, profits, instrument expressed that defense ministry purchasing should be used interventionist "key" technologies and to back "the winners" to support of national industrial policy, awarding contracts as an industrial policy). Supporters of free markets (e.g., Austrian economists) are critical, stressing that the future is uncertain and that there are unintended secondary effects, so that today's winners might be tomorrow's losers; and that governments have no competence as entrepreneurs. Interestingly, public choice analysis also predicts that governments can fail in their efforts to improve economic performance. Furthermore, using defense procurement as an instrument of industrial policy raises fundamental questions about the objectives of defense policy. Is defense procurement aimed at the efficient purchasing of equipment for national defense or the pursuit of wider economic and social objectives, including protection of the national defense industrial base (Faltas, 1986; Taylor and Hayward, 1989; see also chapter 7)?
2. Defense equipment, especially high technology equipment, is costly and the trends are toward rising costs in real terms. The American B2 stealth bomber was estimated to cost $35 billion for fifteen aircraft and the US F-22 advanced tactical fighter aircraft is likely new to cost some $130 million per copy (1991-2 prices). Similarly, equipment is much costlier than the previous generations which it replaces (although the new equipment is more productive). Typically real unit production costs of defense increase equipment (aircraft, helicopters, missiles, warships, submarines) increase by about 10 percent per annum, implying a doubling in cost to every 7.25 such years (Pugh, 1993). Since defense budgets fail to match such cost increases there are inevitable downward pressures on size and formation of armed forces with an associated need to reshape the defense industries which supply the forces (e.g., the long-run trend towards a one-ship navy and a one-aircraft air force). Not surprisingly, faced with such pressures, efforts are made to introduce new procurement policies, such as competition policy, which might at least postpone some of the adjustment effects (Pugh, 1993).
3. Technical progress has been a distinctive feature of defense equipment markets. Major technical advances resulting in new products (e.g. jet engines, missiles, electronics, helicopters, etc.), have created new markets requiring firms to offer new development and production facilities with a greater emphasis on research and development (R & D). Since 1945, the long-run trend has been towards a smaller number of larger firms, reflected in mergers and exits from the defense sector. As a result, the high technology sectors (e.g. aerospace, avionics) usually consist of one or a relatively few large national suppliers either publicly or privately owned (monopoly or oligopoly). Such markets are a major departure from the economists' model of perfect competition. The cuts in defense spending in the USA, UK, and elsewhere in the EU during the 1990s are likely to reinforce the trend towards exits from the industry and restructuring around an even smaller number of large defense contractors. As a result, EU states will only be able to maintain competition by opening up their national markets to foreign suppliers.
4. A number of defense industries, particularly the high technology sectors, are characterized by decreasing costs: hence, if the aim is to exploit scale economies, a national market will only support one firm of (monopoly). In such sectors, quantity is a major determinant unit costs and hence competitiveness. Long production runs volume mean that high fixed R & D costs can be spread over a larger and, in addition, there are scale and learning economies in production (Bittleston, 1990; see also section 5.4).
5. Defense markets and industries are government regulated. Governments can determine whether their national markets should be open or closed, they can insist upon monitoring costs, and there is often stage regulation of profits on defese contracts). Typically, the aim of of profit controls is to ensure that defence contractors are not making excessive profits or excessive losses on defense business;  and the prevention of excessives losses is designed to retain a domestic industrial base. As a results profits on defence work might not provide the standard signaling mechanism for entry or exit. Moreover, profit-conscious firms are likely to adapt to regulatory constraints. For example where profits are controlled firms are likely to increase expenditure of unregulated items twhich give satisfaction to their managers  (e.g., luxury offices, company cars, hoarding scientists and engineers: Hartley and Tisdell, 1981).

## Demand: procurement policy

Procurement policy represents the demand side of the defense equipment market. involves a set of related choices, with defense contracts as one element the choice set:

1. The choice of equipment required for the armed forces with implications for technical progress. This involves choosing between competing demands from each of the armed forces for a larger share of a limited defense budget. In principle, such choices need to be made in relation to the nation's security requirements, regardless of the traditional monopoly property rights of each of the services. For example, why not allow the army with its land-based missiles to compete with the air force and its manned combat aircraft for a nation's air defense (similarly aircraft versus warships)? In reality, such decisions are often made on the principle of Buggin's Turn. Last year, the navy obtained its new aircraft carrier; this year it is the turn of the air force to receive its new fighter aircraft; next year, the army can have a new tank!
2. The choice of contractor. A contractor has to be selected either based by direct negotiation with a preferred supplier or by competition based on price and nonprice criteria, with the market restricted to domestic firms or open to foreign suppliers. Public choice analysis predicts that domestic firms will oppose opening the national market to foreign suppliers: they will lobby vote-sensitive governments claiming that relying on foreigners will impair national security and will mean and will mean the loss of jobs, technology, and valuable foreign exchange (depending on whether the exchange rate is viewed as a policy objective or policy instrument). Economists can critically appraise such arguments pointing to the costs national independence (protection); showing that there are alternative and often more efficient methods of achieving jobs, technology and other policy objectives; and raising questions as to whether the aims of defense procurement policy are to protect the nations citizens or its domestic defence industries (who is maximising what benefit for of whom? (Hartley, 1991a,b)). 
3. The choice of of contract. A contract has to be selected from the extremes of firm or fixed-price contracts, a cost-plus the some firm intermediate target cost-incentive sharing arrangement. With a firm price contract, the firm receives the contract price, no more and no less. Fixed-price contracts allow for variations  of price based on agreed price index reflecting inflation in labor and material price contract inputs. Where a prime contractor receives a fixed-price contract (with agreed price variations), it has every incentive to negotiate firm prices with its suppliers, so that the prime contractor appropriates all the financial benefits of price variations. An alternative solution would be to award competitively determined firm price contracts, leaving contractors to make their own judgements about future inflation, incorporating such estimates own their tender bid. Of course, another solution is to award a cost-plus in contract the in which the contractor recoups all its costs incurred project plus an agreed profit rate based on costs or with a fixed on fee. Such contracts are used for development work where there might be considerable uncertainty. Not surprisingly, these "blank cheque" contracts lead to inefficiency, labor hoarding, cost escalation and "gold-plating" (Scherer, 1964; Kennedy, 1983). A comparison of firm price and cost-plus contracts identifies two policy issues. First, how should the risks of the program be distributed between the state (buyer) and the contractor? Second, what are the implications of different contractual arrangements for firm behavior and efficiency, and for efficiently meeting the buyer's requirements. Of course, it is not always possible for the buyer (defense ministry) to specify in advance all its detailed requirements: hence, it might prefer a contract which allows it some discretion to modify its requirements. But, once the contract has been awarded, any contract modifications have to be negotiated with the monopoly contractor.
4. The incentives to choose. Ultimately, efficient solutions depend upon the set of incentives and penalties incorporated into the employment contracts of procurement staff in the armed forces and defense ministries. Often individuals and groups in the armed forces and defense ministries have every incentive to spend: there are no inducements to economize if all the savings by, say, the navy are used to by more tanks for the army, or they eventually benefit the national Treasury.
5. How are choices made? Within any procurement organization, equipment choices will often be made by a committee. Clearly, the size of committee, its objectives, the composition of its membership, the conditions of entry and exit, the background of the chairman and the voting arrangements are central to determining actual procurement choices.

Consideration of the choices and organizational arrangements outlined above are usually ignored or neglected by economists. This is not surprising since economists have often regarded governments as a "black box" which always pursues the "will of the people". Such an approach ignores the insights provided by public choice analysis which applies the neo-classical concepts of exchange and self interest to the political market place of voters, parties, governments, bureaucracies, and interest groups; and also ignores the fact that in defense the "will of the people" is not always apparent (so providing governments and defense ministries with opportunities for discretionary behavior (Buchanan, 1986)). 

Public choice analysis provides two predictions of relevance to defense contracting and procurement policy. First, government policies tend to favor producers more than consumers. Second, budget-maximizing bureaucracies will be inefficient: their budgets will be too large as they exaggerate the demand for their services and underestimate the costs of their preferred activities (eg, exaggerating the threat; resulting in cost escalation on equipment projects (Hartley, 1991b, chapter 5; Dunleavy,1991; Mayer, 1991)].

In evaluating procurement policy, economists have traditionally applied their standard economic models of free trade and competition, including the opportunities for competitive bidding at various stages in a project's life cycle. Here, many of the pioneering contributions in the microeconomics of defense emerged in the 1960s and were made by American economists, with the Rand Corporation in the forefront. The Classic text by Hitch and McKean devoted a short section to defense contracting (Hitch and McKean, 1960, pp. 223-33).